.TH OVCP 8 "2026-07-13" "ovcp" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
ovcp \- OpenVPN Control Plane: web UI, native PKI, and lifecycle management for an OpenVPN server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ovcp
[\fB\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR]
\fICOMMAND\fR
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ovcp
is a single static binary that manages one OpenVPN server: a built\-in
certificate authority (no easy\-rsa), client profile export, server
configuration, and a web admin UI. It talks to the running
.BR openvpn (8)
process over its management \fIunix socket\fR (status and disconnects) and
owns everything else through files in its data directory.
.B ovcp
runs as root, is the sole owner of the PKI and configuration, and starts
openvpn itself as a reaped foreground child \(en the same on the host, under
systemd, and inside the container.
.PP
The CA private key is stored encrypted (argon2id + AES\-256\-GCM). Every
signing operation (issue, revoke) requires the CA passphrase, which is
used in memory and never persisted: compromise of the host alone does not
compromise the CA.
.PP
This page is also rendered into the web UI's \fBDocs\fR tab at build time
(\fBmandoc\fR, see \fImake ui\fR) \(en one source, readable with or without
a terminal.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
Runtime:
.BR openvpn (8)
on \fBPATH\fR \(en ovcp starts, stops, and controls it but never bundles
it. Linux with \fI/dev/net/tun\fR; root or \fBCAP_NET_ADMIN\fR for openvpn
to bring the tunnel up (see \fBPRIVILEGES\fR).
.PP
Build: Go 1.22+, a C compiler (\fBCGO_ENABLED=1\fR, needed by the sqlite
driver), Node/npm (Svelte UI sources), and \fBmandoc\fR (renders this page
into the UI's Docs tab, see \fImake ui\fR). Optional: \fBnfpm\fR (\fImake
deb\fR/\fImake rpm\fR), \fBpodman\fR or \fBdocker\fR (\fImake image\fR).
.SH SECURITY
Tier\-2 CA model: the CA private key is encrypted at rest (argon2id +
AES\-256\-GCM); every signing operation (\fBissue\fR, \fBrevoke\fR) requires
the operator passphrase, used in memory and never persisted.
\fBrotate\-ca\fR re\-encrypts it under a new passphrase without reissuing
anything.
.PP
Every operator secret \(en the CA passphrase, admin/user passwords \(en
must be at least 8 characters, enforced the same way whether set
interactively, via \fBOVCP_CA_PASSPHRASE\fR / \fBOVCP_USER_PASSWORD\fR, or
through the web UI.
.PP
Client private keys are embedded in the exported profile once and never
stored server\-side (no escrow): a lost profile means revoke + reissue, not
recovery. Certificates (public) are kept and downloadable anytime. Optionally
protect a profile's embedded key with its own password
(\fB\-key\-pass\fR / the web UI's field); OpenVPN prompts for it on connect.
.PP
The management socket is unix\-only, never TCP. The admin UI is HTTPS\-only
(self\-signed certificate, regenerated automatically if it expires or the
CN changes), loopback by default, with signed sessions (HttpOnly, Secure,
SameSite=Strict cookies), CSRF tokens on every mutating request, RBAC
(\fBadmin\fR / \fBoperator\fR / \fBreadonly\fR, see \fBuser\fR), optional
TOTP 2FA, rate\-limited logins (locks out a username+IP pair after repeated
failures, self\-clears after the window passes), and a full audit log
(\fBaudit\fR).
.PP
\fBcustom\-opts\fR (server config) and \fBexport\fR's
\fB\-custom\-opts\fR (one client's profile) both append raw openvpn
directives verbatim, with no parsing or validation. Neither needs a role
beyond what already gates that surface: server config is
\fBadmin\fR\-only already (\fBPUT /api/config\fR), and whichever role can
export a profile at all already chooses its remote host, port, proto, and
cipher. A bad directive just fails openvpn's next start (server) or that
one client's next connection attempt (client) \(en never other clients.
.SH QUICK START
.nf
.RS
# 1. one\-shot setup: CA, server cert, tls\-crypt key, config, admin user
ovcp init \-server\-cn vpn.example.com

# 2. run (admin UI on https://127.0.0.1:8443)
ovcp serve

# 3. hand out a client profile
ovcp export \-cn alice \-remote vpn.example.com > alice.ovpn
.RE
.fi
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init \fB\-server\-cn\fR \fIHOST\fR [\fB\-ca\-cn\fR \fINAME\fR] [\fB\-ca\-years\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB\-server\-days\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB\-admin\fR \fINAME\fR] [\fB\-sock\fR \fIPATH\fR]
One\-shot initialization. Creates the CA (prompting twice for a new
passphrase), issues the server certificate for \fIHOST\fR, generates the
tls\-crypt key, writes \fIserver.conf\fR, and creates the initial admin
user. Idempotent: existing artifacts are kept. Pass \fB\-admin\fR "" to
skip user creation.
.TP
.B serve [\fB\-listen\fR \fIADDR\fR] [\fB\-sock\fR \fIPATH\fR]
Run the HTTPS admin UI and REST API (default \fI127.0.0.1:8443\fR, self\-signed
certificate generated on first run). Starts the
.B openvpn
worker from \fIserver.conf\fR as a foreground child (reaped on exit \(en no
zombies) with its log in \fIlogs/openvpn.log\fR, and stops it on clean shutdown.
An exit that
.B ovcp
did not itself request (crash, OOM\-kill, an external \fBkill \-9\fR) is
logged at error level and auto\-restarted after a few seconds; a config bad
enough to make openvpn exit repeatedly trips a breaker after a handful of
attempts within a short window, logging an error instead of retrying
forever (fix the config, then \fBovcp vpn start\fR). A deliberate
.B ovcp vpn stop
never auto\-restarts.
Exposes a root\-only control socket so a separate
.B ovcp vpn
invocation can drive the worker. Refuses to start with an
actionable error if
.B ovcp init
has not been run.
.TP
.B issue \fB\-cn\fR \fINAME\fR [\fB\-kind\fR client|server] [\fB\-days\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB\-out\fR \fIPREFIX\fR] [\fB\-key\-pass\fR \fIPW\fR]
Issue a certificate. Client private keys are printed (or written with
\fB\-out\fR) exactly once and never stored; if lost, revoke and reissue.
Certificates (public) are kept and can be re\-downloaded anytime with
\fBlist\fR / the web UI. With \fB\-key\-pass\fR the private key is
AES\-256 encrypted; OpenVPN prompts for the password on connect \(en
client certs only, rejected for \fB\-kind\fR \fIserver\fR (openvpn cannot
unlock an encrypted key non\-interactively at startup). \fB\-days\fR must
be positive. Only one certificate per CN may be active (non\-revoked) at a
time \(en \fBrevoke\fR the existing one first to reissue under the same CN.
.TP
.B export \fB\-cn\fR \fINAME\fR [\fB\-remote\fR \fIHOST\fR] [\fB\-port\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB\-proto\fR udp|tcp] [\fB\-server\-cn\fR \fICN\fR] [\fB\-out\fR \fIPREFIX\fR] [\fB\-key\-pass\fR \fIPW\fR] [\fB\-split\-tunnel\fR] [\fB\-custom\-opts\fR \fIOPTS\fR|\fB\-\fR]
Issue a fresh client certificate and print a complete inline
\fI.ovpn\fR profile (CA, cert, key, tls\-crypt) on stdout, or write it to
\fIPREFIX\fR\fI.ovpn\fR with \fB\-out\fR (same convention as \fBissue\fR).
\fB\-remote\fR defaults to \fBOVCP_SERVER_CN\fR / the server cert's CN, and
is only required if neither is set. \fB\-port\fR, \fB\-proto\fR, and the
data cipher default to the server's configured values (set via the web
UI's Settings tab \(en there is no CLI equivalent for those three); pass
\fB\-port\fR or \fB\-proto\fR to override. \fB\-key\-pass\fR
password\-protects the embedded key. Same one\-active\-cert\-per\-CN rule
as \fBissue\fR.
.RS
.TP
\fB\-split\-tunnel\fR
Adds a client\-side \fBpull\-filter\fR that ignores the server's pushed
\fBredirect\-gateway\fR, so this one client keeps its own default route
instead of tunneling all traffic; every other pushed option (DNS, explicit
routes) still applies. Only accepted when the server itself redirects all
traffic (\fBRoute all client traffic through the VPN\fR, web UI Settings)
\(en rejected otherwise, since there is nothing to opt out of. Also
available from the web UI (Certs tab), shown only when the server
redirects.
.TP
\fB\-custom\-opts\fR
Appends raw openvpn directives to this one client's profile, unvalidated
\(en a bad line only breaks that one client's connection, never the
server. Three equivalent forms, pick whichever fits:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
a comma\-separated list, split into one directive per line:
\fB\-custom\-opts\fR "keepalive 5 30,verb 4"
.IP \(bu 2
a bare \fB\-\fR, which opens \fB$EDITOR\fR (falls back to \fBvi\fR) for
multi\-line editing, same idiom as \fBgit commit\fR
.IP \(bu 2
a file's contents by way of the shell:
\fB\-custom\-opts\fR "$(cat FILE)" \(en already newline\-separated with no
commas, so it passes through the comma\-split unchanged
.RE
Also available from the web UI (Certs tab), a plain multi\-line field.
.RE
.TP
.B revoke \fB\-serial\fR \fIHEX\fR
Revoke a certificate and regenerate the CRL. OpenVPN rejects the client
on its next handshake (\fBcrl\-verify\fR is always configured).
.TP
.B rotate\-ca
Re\-encrypt the CA private key under a new passphrase (prompts for the
current one, then the new one twice). The CA keypair and certificate are
unchanged \(en issued certificates stay valid, nothing needs reissuing.
\fICLI\-only\fR by design \(en a rare maintenance operation, not a routine
one like \fBissue\fR/\fBrevoke\fR, so the new passphrase never has to cross
the HTTP surface at all.
.TP
.B renew\-server [\fB\-days\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB\-server\-cn\fR \fICN\fR]
Reissue the openvpn server certificate (a fresh keypair and serial),
revoking the outgoing one and writing the new one to the same paths
.B serve
reads. Defaults to the existing server cert's CN (or \fBOVCP_SERVER_CN\fR);
pass \fB\-server\-cn\fR explicitly right after a \fBbackup restore\fR, which
never restores a server cert (see below). Also available from the web UI
(Settings, admin role). Takes effect on the next
.B ovcp vpn restart
\(en openvpn does not hot\-reload its certificate.
.TP
.B custom\-opts
Edit the server config's raw extra directives in \fB$EDITOR\fR (falls
back to \fBvi\fR), same idiom as \fBgit commit\fR / \fBcrontab \-e\fR.
Saved text is appended verbatim to the next rendered \fIserver.conf\fR,
unvalidated \(en a bad line fails on the next restart. Also available
from the web UI (Settings, admin role, a plain multi\-line field); both
write the same persisted value. Takes effect on the next
.B ovcp vpn restart
\(en openvpn does not hot\-reload its configuration.
.TP
.B backup create [\fB\-out\fR \fIFILE\fR]
Write an encrypted archive (argon2id + AES\-256\-GCM, prompts twice for a
backup passphrase) of the CA, CRL, tls\-crypt key, \fIserver.conf\fR, and
database. Also available from the web UI (Settings, admin role).
Deliberately excludes the openvpn server certificate and private key:
OpenVPN clients trust the CA chain and a CN match, never a pinned server
cert, so a restore just issues a fresh one (\fBrenew\-server\fR) \(en the
server's private key never has to leave the machine. Client private keys
were never stored here to begin with (no escrow); nothing to back up there
either.
.TP
.B backup restore [\fB\-force\fR] \fIFILE\fR
Decrypt and extract a backup into \fB\-data\fR (must be an uninitialized
directory, or pass \fB\-force\fR to overwrite one). \fICLI\-only\fR by
design \(en restoring is an offline, disaster\-recovery operation against a
data directory, not something to expose over HTTP on a possibly\-live
server. Follow with \fBrenew\-server\fR (the archive has no server cert)
and \fBovcp vpn start\fR.
.TP
.B list
List issued certificates with status (valid, REVOKED, expired).
.TP
.B status [\fB\-sock\fR \fIPATH\fR] [\fB\-ctrl\fR \fIPATH\fR]
Overview: whether the openvpn worker is running (with its pid, via the
control socket) and, if so, the connected clients (via the management
socket). Historical traffic/connection graphs and per\-client session
history are web\-UI\-only (Stats tab); there is no CLI equivalent.
.TP
.B kill \fB\-cn\fR \fINAME\fR [\fB\-sock\fR \fIPATH\fR]
Disconnect a client immediately.
.TP
.B vpn start|stop|restart|reconnect|status
Manage or inspect the openvpn worker owned by a running
.B serve
(over the control socket, see \fBOVCP_CTRL_SOCK\fR).
.B start
launches it (idempotent),
.B stop
sends SIGTERM,
.B status
reports whether it is running,
.B restart
is a full stop + fresh start \(en required for any configuration, key, or
CRL change \(en and
.B reconnect
sends SIGUSR1 for a soft session reset (runtime recovery, no process
replacement). SIGHUP / in\-place reload is intentionally not supported: a
fresh restart re\-reads every root\-owned file, which SIGHUP cannot. Each
op prints the resulting openvpn pid, so a repeated
.B start
reports \(lqalready started\(rq rather than spawning a second process.
.TP
.B user add \fB\-name\fR \fINAME\fR [\fB\-role\fR admin|operator|readonly]
.TQ
.B user list
.TQ
.B user del|disable|enable|passwd \fB\-name\fR \fINAME\fR
.TQ
.B user totp \fB\-name\fR \fINAME\fR [\fB\-off\fR]
Manage web UI users. Roles: \fBadmin\fR (everything), \fBoperator\fR
(certificates, disconnects), \fBreadonly\fR (default for \fBadd\fR).
.B user totp
prints an otpauth:// enrollment URL; \fB\-off\fR disables 2FA instead.
.TP
.B audit
Print the last 50 audit entries (logins, issues, revocations, kills,
config changes).
.TP
.B debug on|off
Toggle verbose logging on a running \fBserve\fR (over the control socket,
see \fBOVCP_CTRL_SOCK\fR) \(en no restart, resets to normal on the next one.
.TP
.B version
Print the version.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-data \fIDIR\fR
Data directory. Overrides \fB$OVCP_DATA\fR for this invocation; if neither
is given, defaults to \fI/var/lib/ovcp\fR. This directory is the root every
path in \fBFILES\fR below is relative to. Must come before the command
(\fBovcp \-data\fR \fIDIR\fR \fICOMMAND\fR), like \fBgit \-C\fR / \fBdocker
\-H\fR.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print the command list (\fBCOMMANDS\fR above, condensed) and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B OVCP_DATA
Data directory \(en the source of truth for where ovcp keeps everything
(see \fBFILES\fR). Defaults to \fI/var/lib/ovcp\fR if unset; \fB\-data\fR
overrides it for a single invocation.
.TP
.B OVCP_LISTEN
Admin UI listen address(es), comma\-separated. Each gets the full
HTTPS/auth stack. VPN\-side addresses (e.g. 10.8.0.1:8443, reachable by
connected clients) may be bound before the tun interface exists
(IP_FREEBIND).
.TP
.B OVCP_MGMT_SOCK
OpenVPN management socket path (default \fI/run/ovcp/mgmt.sock\fR).
.TP
.B OVCP_CTRL_SOCK
ovcp control socket for \fBvpn\fR subcommands (default
\fI/run/ovcp/control.sock\fR); the CLI talks to a running \fBserve\fR here.
.TP
.B OVCP_SERVER_CN
Default client \fBremote\fR for \fBexport\fR and CN for the admin UI
certificate (falls back to the VPN server certificate's CN).
.TP
.B OVCP_CA_PASSPHRASE, OVCP_USER_PASSWORD
Non\-interactive passphrase/password for automation, tests, and container
init (the image defaults both to \fIchangeme\fR). Avoid on
shared systems: environment variables can leak.
.TP
.B OVCP_CA_NEW_PASSPHRASE, OVCP_BACKUP_PASSPHRASE
Non\-interactive equivalents for \fBrotate\-ca\fR's new passphrase and
\fBbackup\fR's archive passphrase. Same leak caveat as above.
.TP
.B OVCP_OPENVPN_USER, OVCP_OPENVPN_GROUP
Unprivileged account openvpn drops to after startup (default \fInobody\fR
/ \fInogroup\fR). The container image sets \fBOVCP_OPENVPN_GROUP=nobody\fR
since Alpine has no \fInogroup\fR.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable ANSI color in \fBovcp\fR's own log output. Color is already off
when stderr isn't a terminal (piped, journal, redirected to a file).
.SH FILES
All paths below are rooted at \fB$OVCP_DATA\fR (default \fI/var/lib/ovcp\fR)
\(en set it once and everything follows, including these.
.TP
.I $OVCP_DATA/pki/ca.crt, ca.key.enc
CA certificate and encrypted private key.
.TP
.I $OVCP_DATA/pki/server.crt, server.key
Server keypair used by openvpn. Not included in \fBbackup\fR archives \(en
reissued by \fBrenew\-server\fR after a restore.
.TP
.I $OVCP_DATA/pki/crl.pem
Certificate revocation list (referenced by \fBcrl\-verify\fR).
.TP
.I $OVCP_DATA/pki/tls\-crypt.key
OpenVPN static key for tls\-crypt (control channel encryption).
.TP
.I $OVCP_DATA/server.conf
Generated openvpn configuration. Managed by ovcp; do not edit.
.TP
.I $OVCP_DATA/ovcp.db
SQLite database: users, sessions, certificate metadata, audit log,
connection stats (Stats tab; 24\-hour retention). Private keys are never
stored in the database.
.TP
.I $OVCP_DATA/admin\-tls/
Self\-signed certificate for the admin UI.
.TP
.I $OVCP_DATA/logs/openvpn.log
openvpn's stdout/stderr, appended across restarts.
.TP
.I $OVCP_DATA/logs/ovcp.log
ovcp's own log, mirrored to stderr/journal.
.TP
.I $OVCP_DATA/logs/status.log
openvpn's periodic status dump (connected clients); not the audit log.
.TP
.I /var/log/ovcp
Symlink to \fI$OVCP_DATA/logs\fR (package/container installs), for
logrotate and log\-shipper discovery.
.TP
.I $OVCP_MGMT_SOCK, $OVCP_CTRL_SOCK
OpenVPN management socket (unix only, never TCP) and ovcp's root\-only
(0600) control socket for \fBvpn\fR lifecycle ops. Default to
\fI/run/ovcp/mgmt.sock\fR and \fI/run/ovcp/control.sock\fR.
.SH EXAMPLES
Issue and download a profile for a phone, valid two years:
.nf
.RS
ovcp export \-cn dana\-phone \-remote vpn.example.com > dana\-phone.ovpn
.RE
.fi
Revoke it later:
.nf
.RS
ovcp list
ovcp revoke \-serial 682b2da83f4d...
.RE
.fi
Serve the admin UI on the host loopback and again inside the VPN itself, so
it's reachable through the tunnel without ever exposing it publicly (works
even before tun0 exists \(en see \fBIP_FREEBIND\fR under \fBOVCP_LISTEN\fR):
.nf
.RS
OVCP_LISTEN=127.0.0.1:8443,10.8.0.1:8443 ovcp serve
.RE
.fi
A laptop that should reach the VPN subnet but keep its own default route
(the server redirects all traffic for everyone else):
.nf
.RS
ovcp export \-cn dana\-laptop \-remote vpn.example.com \-split\-tunnel > dana\-laptop.ovpn
.RE
.fi
Add a couple of extra directives to one client's profile, and separately
edit the server's own extra directives:
.nf
.RS
ovcp export \-cn dana\-phone \-remote vpn.example.com \e
  \-custom\-opts "block\-outside\-dns,ping\-restart 30" > dana\-phone.ovpn
ovcp custom\-opts
.RE
.fi
.SH PRIVILEGES
.B ovcp
runs as root and is the sole owner of the PKI and configuration
(\fI0600 root:root\fR), so those files are secure by default \(en there is
no privilege drop and no per\-mode juggling. It starts openvpn, which needs
root or CAP_NET_ADMIN at startup and then drops to \fInobody\fR on its own.
In containers, run with \-\-cap\-add NET_ADMIN; the runtime dir
\fI/run/ovcp\fR (0750) holds the management and control sockets. openvpn
runs as a foreground child of ovcp and cannot outlive it (Pdeathsig).
.PP
A privilege\-separated admin UI (root supervisor + non\-root HTTP worker)
was considered and deliberately not built: reaching the admin UI at all
already means the VPN's own auth+CSRF+RBAC+TOTP has been breached, so a
second process and an IPC protocol didn't earn their complexity for this
tool's threat model. The shipped systemd unit sandboxes the whole process
instead (\fBProtectSystem=strict\fR, \fBNoNewPrivileges\fR,
\fBMemoryDenyWriteExecute\fR, and more) \(en native containment, not an
app\-level privilege split.
.SH DEPLOYMENT
One runtime, everywhere: ovcp owns the openvpn worker (fork/exec + signals,
no SIGHUP, no in\-place reload) the same way on bare metal, under systemd,
and inside a container. If ovcp restarts, its \fBserve\fR process brings
openvpn back up.
.SS systemd
A single unit runs ovcp as root; ovcp starts and stops openvpn itself.
.nf
.RS
make release && sudo make install
sudo install \-m644 deploy/systemd/ovcp.service /usr/lib/systemd/system/
sudo OVCP_DATA=/var/lib/ovcp ovcp init \-server\-cn vpn.example.com
sudo systemctl enable \-\-now ovcp
.RE
.fi
.SS container
One all\-in\-one image (\fBmake image\fR): ovcp (as root) owns the PKI and
starts openvpn inside the container. Init once, then run:
.nf
.RS
podman run \-\-rm \-v ovcp:/var/lib/ovcp ovcp init \-server\-cn vpn.example.com
podman run \-d \-\-cap\-add=NET_ADMIN \-\-device /dev/net/tun \e
  \-p 1194:1194/udp \-p 127.0.0.1:8443:8443 \-v ovcp:/var/lib/ovcp ovcp
.RE
.fi
The image defaults \fBOVCP_CA_PASSPHRASE\fR/\fBOVCP_USER_PASSWORD\fR to
\fIchangeme\fR for the one\-shot init \(en override with \fB\-e\fR. To split
the UI and the VPN across network interfaces, bind each published port to
the right address, e.g.
\fB\-p 203.0.113.7:1194:1194/udp \-p 192.168.1.10:8443:8443\fR. docker works
the same; the Containerfile is plain OCI.
.SS packages
.B make deb
(or \fBmake rpm\fR) builds a distro package via \fBnfpm\fR, installing the
binary, systemd unit, man page, shell completions, and \fILICENSE\fR to
their standard paths.
.SH SELINUX
On SELinux systems the confined
.BR openvpn (8)
domain cannot read a non\-standard data directory. Run
\fIdeploy/selinux.sh\fR once (labels the data dir \fIopenvpn_etc_t\fR and
the logs \fIopenvpn_var_log_t\fR; honors \fB$OVCP_DATA\fR). ovcp itself
runs unconfined and needs no policy.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openvpn (8),
.BR systemctl (1)
